= ABAnalyzer

ABAnalyzer is a Ruby library that will perform testing to determine if there is a statistical difference in categorical data (typically called an A/B Test).  By default, it uses a G-Test for independence, but a Chi-Square test for independence can also be used.  For more information, see:
* http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/G-test
* http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Pearson%27s_chi-square_test

== Installation
Simply run:
  gem install abanalyzer

== Basic Usage
The simplest test (which uses a gtest):

  require 'rubygems'
  require 'abanalyzer'
  
  values = {}
  values[:agroup] = { :opened => 100, :unopened => 300 }
  values[:bgroup] = { :opened => 50, :unopened => 350 }

  tester = ABAnalyzer::ABTest.new values
  # Are the two different?  Returns true or false (at 0.05 level of significance)
  puts tester.different?


== Multiple Categories
You can use the ABAnalyzer module to test for differences in more than two categories.  For instance, to test accross three:

  require 'rubygems'
  require 'abanalyzer'
  
  values = {}
  values[:agroup] = { :male => 200, :female => 250 }
  values[:bgroup] = { :male => 150, :female => 300}
  values[:cgroup] = { :male => 50, :female => 50 }

  tester = ABAnalyzer::ABTest.new values
  # Are the two different?  Returns true or false (at 0.05 level of significance)
  puts tester.different?


== Tests Available
You can get the actual p-value for either a Chi-Square test for independence or a G-Test for independence.

  ...
  tester = ABAnalyzer::ABTest.new values
  puts tester.chisquare_p
  puts tester.gtest_p


You can additionally get the actual score for either a Chi-Square test for independence or a G-Test for independence.

  ...
  tester = ABAnalyzer::ABTest.new values
  puts tester.chisquare_score
  puts tester.gtest_score


== Sample Size Calculations
Let's say you want to determine how large your sample size needs to be for an A/B test.  Let's say your baseline is 10%, and you want to be able to determine if there's at least a 10% relative lift (1% absolute) to 11%.  Let's assume you want a power[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Statistical_power] of 0.8 and a {significance level}[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Statistical_significance] of 0.05 (that is, an 80% chance of that you'll fail to recognize a difference when there is one, and a 5% chance of a false negative).

  ...
  ABAnalyzer.calculate_size(0.1, 0.11, 0.05, 0.8)
   => 14751

This means that you will need at least 14,751 people in each group sample.  You can see this same example with R at {on the 37 signals blog}[http://37signals.com/svn/posts/3004-ab-testing-tech-note-determining-sample-size].


== Confidence Intervals
You can also get a {confidence interval}[http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Confidence_interval].  Let's say you have the results of a test where there were 711 successes out of 4000 trials.  To get a 95% confidence interval of the "true" value of the conversion rate, use:

  ...
  ABAnalyzer.confidence_interval(711, 4000, 0.95)
   => [0.1659025512617185, 0.1895974487382815]

This means (roughly) that if you ran this experiment over and over, 95% of the time the resulting proportion would be between 17% and 19%.

You can also determine what the relative confidence intervals would be.  Let's say that your old conversion rate was 13%, and you wanted to know what sort of relative lift you could get.

  ...
  ABAnalyzer.relative_confidence_interval(711, 4000, 0.13, 0.95)
   => [0.27617347124398833, 0.45844191337139606]

This means (roughly) that if you ran this experiment over and over, 95% of the time the resulting proportion would be a relative lift of between 28% and 46%.  Go buy yourself a beer!


== Running Tests
Testing can be run by using:
  rake test
